# 1

Translate the following sentences from English to predicate logic. The domain
that you are working over is X, the set of people. You may use the functions
S(x), meaning that “x has been a student of 6.042,” A(x), meaning that “x has
gotten an ‘A’ in 6.042,” T(x), meaning that “x is a TA of 6.042,” and E(x, y),
meaning that “x and y are the same person.”

## a

There are people who have taken 6.042 and have gotten A’s in 6.042

    ∃ x, y ∈ X. S(x) ∧ S(y) ∧ A(x) ∧ A(y)

## b

All people who are 6.042 TA’s and have taken 6.042 got A’s in 6.042

    ∀ x ∈ X. (T(x) ∧ S(x)) ⇒ A(x))

See http://math.stackexchange.com/q/2083390/399542. I think the outer
parentheses are redundant, so 

    ∀ x ∈ X. T(x) ∧ S(x)) ⇒ A(x)

is equivalent, i.e the quantifier operates on everything until the next period.

e.g. Goldbach's conjecture can be written as

    ∀ n ∈ N. (n ∈ Evens) ⇒ (∃p, q ∈ Primes. p + q = n)

The scope of the first quantifier is the entire proposition.

## c

There are no people who are 6.042 TA’s who did not get A’s in 6.042

    ¬(∃ x ∈ X. T(x) ∧ ¬A(x))

("it is not true that: there is a person who is a TA and who didn't get an A")

which (by the rules of negating quantifiers) is equivalent to

    ∀ x ∈ X. ¬(T(x) ∧ ¬A(x))

("all people did not: TA and get an A")

## d

There are at least three people who are TA’s in 6.042 and have not taken 6.042

    ∃ x, y, z ∈ X. T(x) ∧ T(y) ∧ T(z) ∧ ¬S(x) ∧ ¬S(y) ∧ ¬S(z) ∧ ¬E(x, y) ∧ ¬E(x, z) ∧ ¬E(y, z)

Note: if this question had been "there are exactly three people" it would have
been a little tougher. 

One way to do it would have been to add

    ∧ (∀ w ∈ X. T(w) ∧ ¬(w) ⇒ (w = x ∨ w = y ∨ w = z))

i.e. if w is a person for whom the conditions are true, then w is either x or y
or z. See http://math.stackexchange.com/q/962829/399542.

# 2

Skip.

# 3

## a

By comparison of truth tables

    (A ∧ B) ⇔ ¬(A nand B)

    (A ∨ B) ⇔ (¬A nand ¬B)

    (A ⇒ B) ⇔ (A nand ¬B)

## b

    ¬A ⇔ (A nand A)

## c

    True ⇔ (A nand ¬A) ⇔ (A nand (A nand A))

    False ⇔ (A nand (A nand A)) nand (A nand (A nand A))

# 4

Binary search narrows down light coin to one of 6 with first weigh, then 3,
then 1.

# 5

Prove that if r is irrational then r^(1/5) is also irrational.

Proof. We prove the contrapositive: if r^(1/5) is rational then r is also
rational.

If r^(1/5) is rational then r^(1/5) = a/b where a and b are integers.

Then r = a^5/b^5. Both a^5 and b^5 are integers, therefore r is rational. QED.

# 6

## Lemma 1. The sum of two even numbers or two odd numbers is even.

_Proof_. 2i + 2j = 2(i+j), which is even.

(2i + 1) + (2j + 1) = 2(i+j+1), which is even.

## Lemma 2. The sum of an even and odd number is odd.

_Proof_. 2i + 2j + 1 = 2(i+j) + 1, which is one bigger than an even number, and
therefore odd.

## Lemma 3. The product of two even numbers is even. 

_Proof_. (2i) * (2j) = 4ij, which is even for all integers i, j.

## Lemma 4. The product of two odd numbers is odd.

_Proof_. (2i + 1) * (2j + 1) = 4ij + 2i + 2j + 1 = 2(i + j + 2ij) + 1. This is
the sum of an even and odd number, which is odd by lemma 2.

## Lemma 5. z^2 is even iff z is even.

_Proof_. We prove that z is even ⇒ z^2 is even and vice verse.

First, we prove z is even ⇒ z^2 is even by lemma 3.

Second, we prove z^2 is even ⇒ z is even by a case analysis. There are two
cases:

 1. z is even. Then z^2 is even by lemma 3. 
 2. z is odd. Then z^2 is odd by lemma 4.

Therefore z^2 is even ⇒ z is even.

(z^2 is even ⇒ z is even) and (z is even ⇒ z^2 is even). QED.

## Lemma 6. z^2 is odd iff z is odd.

_Proof_. Proceeds like lemma 5. QED.

Now, Suppose w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2 where w, x, y and z are positive integers. 

## Theorem. z is even iff w, x and y are even.

_Proof_. This proof is by case analysis. 

The cases are:

 1. w, x and y are all even

    all squares are even by lemma 3; the sum of the three squares is even by
    lemma 1; z^2 is even; therefore z is even by lemma 5.

 2. one of w, x and y are odd

    two squares are even, one is odd; the sum is therefore odd by lemmas 1 and
    2; z^2 is odd; therefore z is odd by lemma 6.

 3. two of w, x and y are odd

    two squares are odd, one is even; the sum is therefore ... by lemmas

 4. w, x and y are all odd

    all squares are odd; their sum is therefore odd by lemmas 1 and 2; thefore
    z is odd by lemma 6.
