# 1

Define a 3-chain to be a (not necessarily contiguous) subsequence of three
integers, which is either monotonically increasing or monotonically decreasing.
We will show here that any sequence of five distinct integers will contain a
3-chain. 

Write the sequence as a1, a2, a3, a4, a5. Note that a monotonically increasing
sequence is one in which each term is greater than or equal to the previous
term. Similarly, a monotonically decreasing sequence is one in which each term
is less than or equal to the previous term. Lastly, a subsequence is a sequence
derived from the original sequence by deleting some elements without changing
the location of the remaining elements.

## a

_Lemma_. a1 < a2 and there is no 3-chain in the sequence ⇒ a3 < a1.

_Proof_. Proceed by assuming the hypothesis and then case analysis. 

Assume a1 < a2. The possibilities for the first 4 items are then:

 - a1 < a2 < a3. No.
 - a1 < a3 < a2.
    - a1 < a3 < a2 < a4. 3-chain.
    - a1 < a3 < a4 < a2. 3-chain.
    - a1 < a4 < a3 < a2. 3-chain.
    - a4 < a1 < a3 < a2. 3-chain.
 - a3 < a1 < a2.
    - a3 < a1 < a2 < a4. 3-chain.
    - a3 < a1 < a4 < a2
    - a3 < a4 < a1 < a2
    - a4 < a3 < a1 < a2. 3-chain.

Assume further that there is no 3-chain. Then eliminate all sequences with "No."

The only possible configurations in which a1 < a2 and the sequence does not
contain a 3-chain are those in which a3 < a1. QED.

## b

_Lemma_. a1 < a2 and there is no 3-chain in the sequence ⇒ a3 < a4 < a2.

_Proof_. Proceed by assuming the hypothesis and then case analysis.

Hypothesis is as in part (a). The only cases in which it holds are ones in
which a3 < a4 < a2. QED.

## c

_Lemma_. a1 < a2 and a3 < a4 < a2 ⇒ any choice of a5 results in a 3-chain.

_Proof_. Assume hypothesis and then case analysis. 

Given lemmas a and b, possible configurations of first 4 that do _not_ contain
a 3-chain are:

 - a3 < a1 < a4 < a2
   - a3 < a1 < a4 < a2 < a5. 3-chain.
   - a3 < a1 < a4 < a5 < a2. 3-chain.
   - a3 < a1 < a5 < a4 < a2. 3-chain.
   - a3 < a5 < a1 < a4 < a2. 3-chain.
   - a5 < a3 < a1 < a4 < a2. 3-chain.
 - a3 < a4 < a1 < a2
   - a3 < a4 < a1 < a2 < a5. 3-chain.
   - a3 < a4 < a1 < a5 < a2. 3-chain.
   - a3 < a4 < a5 < a1 < a2. 3-chain.
   - a3 < a5 < a4 < a1 < a2. 3-chain.
   - a5 < a3 < a4 < a1 < a2. 3-chain.

Any choice of a5 therefore results in a 3-chain. QED.

## d

_Theorem_. any sequence of five distinct integers must contain a 3-chain.

_Proof_. By contradiction. Suppose the theorem is false. 

There are two possible cases:

 - a1 < a2. If we assume there is no 3-chain then lemmas a, b and c ⇒ the
   sequence must contain a 3-chain. 

 - a2 > a1. lemmas a, b and c hold with the inequalities reversed, i.e.
   - a1 > a2 and there is no 3-chain in the sequence ⇒ a3 > a1.
   - a1 > a2 and there is no 3-chain in the sequence ⇒ a3 > a4 > a2.
   - a1 > a2 and a3 > a4 > a2 ⇒ any choice of a5 results in a 3-chain.
   Therefore a2 > a1 ⇒ the sequence contains a 3-chain.

# 2

_Theorem_.

    Σ(i=0 to i=n) i^3 =  [n(n+1)/2]^2

_Proof_. By induction.

Let P(n) be true if Σ(i=0 to i=n) i^3 =  [ n(n+1)/2 ]^2.

_Base case_. P(0) is true by inspection ✓

_Inductive step_. To show P(n) ⇒ P(n+1), assume P(n) is true then show 
Σ(i=0 to i=n+1) i^3 = [(n+1)(n+2)/2]^2.

    Σ(i=0 to i=n+1) i^3 = Σ(i=0 to i=n) i^3 + (n+1)^3
                        = [n(n+1)/2]^2 + (n+1)^3 by inductive hypothesis
                        = ((n^2 + n)^2)/4 + (n^3 + 3n^2 + 3n + 1)
                        = (n^4 + 2n^3 + n^2 + 4n^3 + 12n^2 + 12n + 4)/4
                        = (n^4 + 6n^3 + 13n^2 + 12n + 4)/2^2
                        = [(n^2 + 3n + 2)/2]^2
                        = [(n+1)(n+2)/2]^2

QED.

# 3

If there are k infected students then the boundary of infection (i.e. the
number of edges with infection on one side and non-infection on the other) is
at most 4k. This is the situation when no infected student is next to any
other.

If all students are infected then the boundary is 4n.

_Theorem_. k < n at t = 0 ⇒ ∀t boundary < 4n.

_Proof_. By induction. 

Let P(t) be the proposition that boundary < 4n at time t.

_Base case_. P(0) is true because k < n and 4k < 4n at t = 0.

_Inductive step_. To show P(t) ⇒ P(t+1), assume P(t) and proceed by case
analysis.

Each newly infected square is adjacent to 2, 3 or 4 previously infected squares:

 - If 2 squares, the boundary doesn't change
 - If 3 squares, the boundary goes down by 2
 - If 4 squares, the boundary goes down by 4

The boundary at t+1 <= t. P(t) ⇒ P(t+1). QED.

# 4

Proof is flawed because inductive step doesn't work to get from n=0 to 1 as it
relies on a^(n-1), which the inductive hypothesis doesn't tell us anything
about since n-1 = -1 when n=0.

# 5

G(0) = 0, G(1) = 1, G(n) = 5G(n-1) - 6G(n-2)

_Theorem_.

    ∀ n ∈ N, G(n) = 3^n - 2^n

_Proof_. By strong induction. P(n) is the proposition that G(n) = 3^n - 2^n

_Base cases_. 

 - n = 0. 3^0 - 2^0 = 0 ✓
 - n = 1. 3^1 - 2^1 = 1 ✓

_Inductive step_. Assume P(0), P(1), P(2) ... P(n). 

Show this ⇒ P(n+1) for n >= 2.

    G(n) = 5G(n-1) - 6G(n-2) by definition
         = 5(3^(n-1) - 2^(n-1)) - 6(3^(n-2) - 2^(n-2)) by inductive hypothesis
         = 5.3^(n-1) - 5.2^(n-1) - 2.3.3^(n-2) + 2.3.2^(n-2)
         = 5.3^(n-1) - 5.2^(n-1) - 2.3^(n-1) + 3.2^(n-1)
         = 3^n - 2^n
         
QED.

# 7

Let b = number of B-lings, z = number of Z-lings.

_Theorem_. If z = 200 and b = 800 at t = 0, then b >= z ∀ t >= 0.

Note the question asks you to prove 2b >= z ∀t, but we are choosing to prove a
stronger statement because its simpler.

_Proof_. By induction on t.

_Base case_. At t = 0, b >= z ✓

_Inductive step_. Let P(t) be the proposition that b >= z at t. Assume P(t) is
true for t >= 0. Show then that P(t+1) is true by exhaustive case analysis
given the inductive hypothesis:

 - if z(t) = b(t) then b(t+1) = z(t+1)
 - if z(t) < b(t) then

       ```
       z(t+1) = b(t) + (b(t)-z(t))//2
       ```

   and

       ```
       b(t+1) = b(t) + 2(b(t)-z(t))//2
              = z(t+1) + (b(t)-z(t))//2
              >= z(t+1)
       ```
   
   because b(t) > z(t) in this case, and floor division of a positive number 
   is >= 0.

P(0) is true. P(t) ⇒ P(t+1). QED.
